Welcome to the lesson on Software Management. In
the last two decades, managing software on Linux
operating systems has become very convenient.
Thanks to the package management systems. In the
past, one had to download the source code compile,
and place the binaries and libraries in their
respective locations, and in the process also
handle any conflicts with existing libraries, etc.
But today, this has been made very convenient,
because the package management system
would take care of all those details for you.
Why do we need to have a package manager? It is
very simple. We need tools to install,
update, remove and manage the software,
and doing it manually would be quite painful,
particularly, with the number of packages runs
into several thousands, which is typical for a
fully installed Linux operating system today.
We also want to be able to install the
new and updated software across network
that is, we may not have the software available as
a disk or as a USB drive with us readily, and we
may want to do the updating over the Internet.
Sometimes we are interested in knowing what are
the various files that are supplied by a given
package. And sometimes we are also wondering,
which package has supplied a particular executable
that we have become familiar using it. So, both
ways a package manager would let you look up the
database and answer your queries. So, the database
of packages on the Linux operating system would
include the versions, and their compatibility
and requirements, so that it makes your life
quite easy in upgrading or adding new packages
without disturbing the existing setup.
And how do you verify whether the software
tools that you are installing are coming from the
original software vendor or the authentic Linux
source? There are ways by which signatures
are placed along with the software tools,
which help you verify the authenticity of the
source of these tools, so it is a very good idea
to pick up software tools for any Linux operating
system from the respective source of that
particular flavor of Linux, and not as a binary
from any arbitrary website on the Internet.
There are some packages which come as a
source code, and you need tools to build
executable versions of those tools, and package
manager also would take care of such aspects.
This is particularly true of kernel modules,
so that whenever the kernel gets updated,
certain modules need to be compiled for that
particular version and made available.
There are two major package types that are
available. One is RPM and the other is DEB or
Debian. The RPM format is followed originally from
the Red Hat Linux operating system. Derived from
the Red Hat operating system our CentOS, Fedora
and Oracle Linux. The RPM format is also followed
by the SUSE Enterprise Linux firmware the
OpenSUSE operating system has been derived.
The Debian format of package type is
from the Debian Linux operating system
from where the Ubuntu Linux has been derived.
The Mint Linux is also a derivative of Ubuntu
and therefore it is also a Debian type of Linux.
Topics is another flavor, which is used
to run Linux off a media drive such as
a CD drive or a DVD drive, and that
is also a derivative from Debian.
As you have noticed, Ubuntu is the most
popular desktop operating system including
its derivatives, and therefore the package type
that we must be familiar is Debian package.
Whereas those who are maintaining Linux servers,
they should be familiarized
with the RPM package type.
Let us check what type of an operating system
we have on the desktop that we are using.
I would just open the shell to check what is
that let us see what type of an operating system
we have. So, we can run the command lsb release
with an option minus a and you see that the
desktop operating system that is right now
running in my machine is Ubuntu version 20.04 LTS,
and the nickname for this operating
system with the version 20.04 is focal.
So, when you look for some packages
for this particular version of Ubuntu,
you could actually search by the nickname which
makes it a little easier to identify those.
Linux operating system is available
for a wide variety of architectures.
So, in the past, we had the 32-bit hardware, so
we would have Linux for i386 architecture or x86
architecture. Today we have 64-bit hardware, and
therefore, we would actually have the operating
system for AMD 64 or x86 underscore 64, as the
architecture. And Linux is now also available on
arm architecture which is popularly used by
the mobile phones. Linux is also available
for power PC architecture.
You may have heard of the RISC
fifth generation risk five architecture. For
example, in the context of Shakti Processor,
those architectures are also readily supported by
the Linux operating system. And sometimes packages
come, which are not tied to any particular
architecture, because they may be a source code
are just pieces of files that are coming
as a bundle, so they would be denoted with
an architecture as noarch or all or src.
So, look out for the string, which indicates
the architecture for which the particular package
has been built, and also which architecture your
desktop mission is, so that you
would install a compatible package.
Usually, this is taken care by the package
manager, so you do not have to worry much.
Let us look at what type of an architecture
we see. You type a command, uname minus a,
and you will see what type of a kernel is running
right now, so my desktop is running kernel 5.11,
and you could see some, the string
that is a x86 64 architecture.
So, once you have identified which version of the
Linux and what architecture then by and large,
you can actually pick up a package and
install it yourself, but it is a good
idea to go through the package management.
So, here are some package management systems
that are widely used across both the RPM type of
package as well as Debian type of package. So, the
so called YUM software, which expands to Yellowdog
Updater Modifier is popularly used to manage the
RPM packages. On Red Hat, you would have the
RPM, as application which would help you manage
the packages, and the YUM package management
system would actually call RPM to install,
update or remove the RPM packages.
In the recent past the YUM package management
system has been modified, and it is now called
as dnf which expands to Dandified YUM. So,
if you have a Red Hat open system, then
you would use dnf to manage the packages.
Most of the options are quite compatible, so you
should be able to readily use those comments.
However, we are going to learn in depth how to
manage the Debian packages, which can be done
both using a graphical user interface, as well
as command line. So, synaptic is a graphical
user interface, and aptitude is a command line
interface available to manage packages of the type
Debian, and at the backend is the advanced package
tool, APT, which does the package management.
And there is a tool called
dpkg, which is called by APT
to actually install the packages. So, we would
also use some of the commands directly using dpkg,
which further makes calls to dpkg hyphen,
Deb, which we normally do not have to call
directly ourselves. So, let us go and explore
further Debian package management on Ubuntu our
similar operating system using a APT and dpkg.
So, we will now use the APT package management
system to explore the packages
on an Ubuntu operate system.
So, here are a few ways by which
you can use the apt cache command,
so you could search for a keyword, you could
ask for what are the packages that have been
installed on the operating system, and you
could also ask for the detailed information of
a particular package or a list of packages.
So, let us look at these commands by actually
running them on the command line. So,
before we proceed, we should first check whether
these comments are available, so that we would
do by using the which command which apt. So,
there is a file that is already available,
so the apt is available for us to explore.
So similarly, we would try apt cache that is
available, and apt-get, so that is also available.
So, we will now first explore the apt cache
command, which does not require the super user
permissions so directly, we can start using that.
So apt, and then search, and you can give a
keyword to search the packages that may have
that particular keyword in either the description
or the title of that particular package.
So, let us search for a package called fortune.
And you will see that there is a lot of packages
which have that word. And you see that there is a
package here called fortunes, which is basically
a data file containing a fortune cookies. So, it
is something funny that it would display on the
screen, if you are under command fortune.
Let us search for a string like nmap
to see what are the packages that have that
particular keyword, and you will see that
there are many such packages, but the one which
we may have in our mind is the network mapper
called nmap. And let us say somebody mentioned
to us wget and we want to know what is it about,
and you will see, that there is definitely
a package by the name wget which retrieves
files from the Internet. So, you could actually
like that search for packages using a keyword and
then identify the specific package that you
may be interested in knowing. Now, we have
identified some packages now, so let us go and
see whether we have those installed or not.
Let us see what are the packages that
are installed on this particular system.
So, we will do that by passing a keyword
to the apt cache command pkgnames.
And it would actually give a long
list of packages that are installed,
so we could actually then pipe it to the less
command so that we could see the screen output
page by page. So, you could see now that
you could scroll through the list.
Now, you see that this list does
not seem to have any sorting order,
so we could also then use a sort to look at those
page by page. So, you can now see that it has
been sorted, so initially numerically after that
alphabetically, so there are a lot of packages
that are installed on this particular system. If
you want to avoid looking through the entire list,
but only those packages that are starting with
a particular character or a set of characters,
you could also do that apt-cache pkgnames and
then after that, you could start with let us say,
nm, and you will see that all those packages,
which have the first two characters as nm will
be displayed, and then nmap is one of those
packages that has been installed. So, we want
to know a little bit more about that package,
so let us go ahead and ask apt-cache to show the
details of that particular package nmap.
So, you can now see that the details are
being displayed here. So, it says that this
package is part of the AMD 64 architecture,
which is compatible with what we have.
And this particular package has a name
for the file from the file that it has come
from. The file that this package came from is
listed here. And if you look at the name, here,
you can make out that it has a particular format.
So, let us go and explore a little
bit more about this format now.
So, here you see the package name is
given in a particular format, but the,
and it is slightly different between the RPM and
DEB. So, for the DEB format, you can see that the
name of the package is followed by an underscore
after that there is a version and a revision,
and then there is an underscore and then the
architecture dot deb. So, let us compare this
with the file name that we just saw.
So, the file name that we just saw is
having two underscores. So, you can see that
the string before the first underscore is
the name of the package nmap and that you can
already confirm here, and then you can see that
the version is here so 7.80 plus df sg1 that
is version 7.8 you can say that is a version,
and after the hyphen is the revision.
So, 2build1 is a revision so there are many
revisions of a particular version that would
come. And then after the second underscore is
the architecture name so AMD 64 is architecture.
So, you can see that the file name of the package
already gives you three pieces of information. The
name of the package, the version and the revision,
as well as, the architecture for which
that particular package has been built. So,
there are some more pieces of information that
would come along, which we would explore now.
So, each package also lists what kind of
a priority that particular package is,
and top was priority is required,
which means, it is essential to
proper functioning of the system. So, you should
not remove that package unless you know what you
are doing. And the second level of priority
is important where it provides functionality,
which enables a system to run smoothly. It is a
good idea to leave packages that are categorized
as important also on the system.
The third level of priority is standard,
which means that these are the packages which
came along with the standard system installation,
but typically, if you have not done any specific
customization to the installation then all
operating systems of that particular version would
contain those packages, which are at the level of
priority called standard or higher than
that namely important required.
And then there are some packages, which are at
the level of priority called optional, which,
if you are running short of the storage, hard
disk space is not enough, you could actually skip
installing them or you can also
delete them if you do not need them.
And then there are some packages, which
are called extra, so one has to pay
a little attention to installing these software,
because these are known to have certain
specialized required requirements or could have
conflict with packages, which are actually of
higher priority, so you should only install them
if you really need them, and in the process do not
actually change the versions of the packages,
which are actually at a higher priority. So,
one has to pay attention by installing these
packages under the category extra. So, let us see
some packages, and identify where this
particular piece of information is located.
So, the output of the nmap package coming
from the apt-cache shows the priority here.
So, it says that it is an extra, that means,
it is not very important. If you want you can
actually remove the package, and that does not
hurt your system. So let us look at some other
package names and see what would it show.
So here is the information about the wget package,
and it comes with a priority
called standard, which means,
that it is at a higher priority than nmap.
And it is a good idea to keep the wget command
because it is a package that comes along with a
standard installation of the operating system.
Let us look at the information about the fortune
package. So, this package is under the optional
category. So, which means that it does not have
any conflict with the higher priority packages,
so you can install it without having to pay
extra attention, but it is an optional package
so if you want, you can delete it, in case
your hard disk is running out of space.
So, what is this command for sure, let us
just check it out and it then generally
display something funny, some quotation
or sometimes it could be even harsh.
So do not be offended. It is an entertainment
for the programmer at the terminal and it will
be different for every time that you type the same
command. It is a randomly picked fortune cookie
that that you can display onto the screen.
The Ubuntu packages also come categorized under
package sections, and the list of sections
will change depending upon the version.
So, for the focal Linux, which is Ubuntu 20.04 lts
here are the packet sections that are listed as
per the website on ubuntu dot com. And you can see
that the large number of categories under which
the software packages have been grouped. So, we
can actually see which package comes under which
package section by looking at the output
of the apt-cache show command.
So, let us have a look at
that now. So, the fortunes
package comes under the section called universe
slash games, so it a game so that is a category.
You could also look at the category for nmap so it
says that it comes under the universe by net so it
is coming under the package group called net.
And let us say wget that would be coming under the
section called web. So, like that
each of these packages comes under
a particular section. So sometimes you
may want to generally look at one of the
packages in a particular section to even explore
packages that you may not have heard of.
So, you can look at the list of package
sections and there are some sections you
may want to go thoroughly because you work in
that particular topic or domain. For example,
if you are fascinated by mathematics, then you
may want to explore all the packages that are
grouped under the package section called
mathematics, and see that some of them
actually may be quite interesting for you,
you may not have come across those packages
until you have a looked at the listing
here on the ubuntu dot com website.
Now, how do we know that the package that
we are installing on our operating system is
an authentic one. So, the way to verify is
by looking at what is called a checksum.
So, there are three major ways by which the
checksums are computed. The first one is md5sum,
which gives you a 128-bit string,
irrespective of the size of the input file
and this would be very different even if there
is a small change in the input string.
And then there is a SHA1 checksum,
which is 160-bit string and then,
the most advanced that is being used today is
the SHA256 checksum, which is a 256-bit string.
So, one can actually compare the check sums of
any package with what is actually listed on the
ubuntu dot com website to see whether the package
that has been installed or being installed is
authentic or not. In fact, there are more ways
by which we can verify the authenticity, but
this is a very good opportunity for us
to see what do these checksums mean.
So, let us explore that in a moment, let us
explore the concept of checksums by using it
on some files that we can create right on the
command line and we would use a simple string,
as the only content of the file to illustrate
how the checksums can be very different for a
small change done to the content of the file.
So, we would echo a string to a file, so let us
do that. This file is edited by, and then I give
my name and then I redirect the string to a file,
file1 dot t txt and let me look at the
file here. So, file1 dot txt has 35 bytes.
Now, what I do is that I make a small change
to this string, so what I would do is,
instead of h I put n, and then write to another
file called file2 dot txt. And now if you look
at the files, the two files, file1 dot txt and
file2 dot txt are identical in their size.
And if we look at the contents, cat file1 dot
txt and file2 dot txt, you could see that if
you do not pay attention they look identical.
Except for the h end and n they look identical.
But when we run the md5sum or any other
sum that we have just not mentioned,
you would see what is the difference.
So, we now run md5sum of the file1 dot
txt and you see that you would get 128-bit
string and then we run it also for
file2 dot txt and you will see that
the two strings are very different. So, it
actually shows you that for a very small
change in the bit sequence of the input stream
the output checksum is very different. And this
is one way by which we can actually identify if
the original file has been tampered or not.
And there are other ways of evaluating the
checksum, so let us look at those also.
So, sha1sum file1 dot txt and sha1sum file2 dot
txt. You could also see that the 160-bit string is
very different between the two files and then you
also have sha256sum file1 dot txt and sha256sum
file2 dot txt.
So, this would be a 256-bit
string, which would also be very different if
the input string is different or input stream
file stream is different even in just a
few bits. So, these are the three major
mechanisms by which the checksums are compared
to ensure that the file that is being installed
is authentic and the same as what has been
supplied by the original vendor of the software.
And one has to pay attention to these
while copying and to ensure that in
the process of downloading, nothing has
gone wrong to the contents of the file.